Rename "query type" to "batch mode", "fixed-size" to "leader-selected", remove max_batch_size. (#563)
ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap: draft-ietf-ppm-dap.md

(\*) Indicates a change that breaks wire compatibility with the previous draft.

12:

- Rename the fixed-size query type to leader-selected, to align the name with
  the behavior of this query type.

> - Remove the `max_batch_size` parameter of the leader-selected query type.

Reviewer: nit: I'd re-order these, since you need the second as context for the first.

Author: Done, though now we're referencing "fixed-size" directly before we mention that it is renamed.

## Queries {#query}

Aggregated results are computed based on sets of reports, called "batches." The
Collector requests the aggregated results for a given batch via a "query." The
Aggregators use this query to carry out the aggregation flow and produce
aggregate shares encrypted to the Collector.

> Each measurement task has a preconfigured "query type." This query type defines

Author: (made this change throughout.)

> both how reports may be grouped into batches, as well as how these batches are
> addressed & the semantics of the query used for collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
both how reports may be partitions into batches, as well as how these batches are
addressed and the semantics of the query used for collection.
```

decide to issue queries out-of-order. In addition, the Collector may need to
vary the duration to adjust to changing report upload rates.

### Leader-selected Queries {#leader-selected-query}

The `leader_selected` query type is used to support applications in which it is

> acceptable for reports to be batched in an arbitrary fashion. Each batch of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
acceptable for reports to be batched by the Leader in an arbitrary fashion. Each batch of
```

Leader selects a recent batch to aggregate. The Leader MUST select a batch that
has not yet been associated with a collection job.

The Aggregators can output batches of any size that is larger than or equal to
`min_batch_size`. This is useful for applications that are not concerned with
sample size, i.e., the privacy guarantee is not affected by the sampling rate of
the population, therefore a larger than expected batch size does not weaken the

> designed privacy guarantee.

Reviewer: This text now lacks important. There is only a minimum batch size, hence no application of DAP is allowed to be "concerned with the sample size".

I think what we want to do now instead is say something generic about how privacy guarantees of DAP depend on the batch size, perhaps when composed with some DP policy.

However I wonder if we still think this is accurate. My intuition is that choosing a larger batch size strictly increases privacy, regardless of how DP is implemented. (Though utility may be negatively impacted.) Is this correct?

cc/ @wangshan since according to `git blame`, you wrote this text originally.

Reviewer 2: generally speaking larger batch size gives better DP guarantee, however, there can be a case where the DP guarantee is based on a certain sampling rate and allowing too big a batch may break that condition. But in practice, I don't think sampling would be implemented in a way that make this a problem. If we decide to remove max_batch_size, I agree it doesn't make much sense to mention sampling here.

Author: I got rid of this text and merged the next paragraph into it, since that paragraph is also concerned with the range of possible batch sizes. The following paragraph is concerned with the batch sizes that might be generated by an implementation, but IMO the existing text makes it clear the difference between specification & implementation advice (and this section is not normative).

Implementation note: The target batch size, if any, is implementation-specific,
and may be equal to or greater than the minimum batch size. Deciding how soon
batches should be output is also implementation-specific. Exactly sizing batches

> may be challenging for Leader deployments in which multiple, independent nodes

Reviewer: I don't object, but why change "deployment" to "implementation" here?

Author: Saying something is "implementation-specific" is (in my experience) much more common than "deployment-specific". Prior to this document, I am not sure I have seen the use of "deployment" in this fashion; instead, typically "implementation" would be used.

Author: Thinking about this a little more, at least in my head:

* An "implementation" is a specific software implementation of some DAP protocol actor. Examples would include Janus or Daphne.
* A "deployment" is a practical deployment of DAP; it would use one or more implementations of the DAP protocol actors, as well as defining tasks (or deciding how tasks can be dynamically configured, e.g. taskprov or some other task-provisioning scheme), defining other configuration parameters, deciding how the software implementations are run on machines, and everything else that comes with deploying software. Examples would include Divvi Up.

running the aggregate interaction (see {{aggregate-flow}}) need to be
coordinated. Applications which include differential privacy may wish to control
the size (or range of sizes) of generated batches in order to control the amount
of noise added to reports by Clients (or added to aggregate shares by

> Aggregators).

Reviewer: here too, @wangshan (see above comment)

Reviewer 2: Similar to above, shall we just say whether to control the size of the batch is an implementation specific choice?

opaque BatchID[32];

struct {
  BatchMode batch_mode;
  select (PartialBatchSelector.batch_mode) {
    case time_interval: Empty;
    case leader_selected: BatchID batch_id;
  };

> } PartialBatchSelector;

Reviewer: While at it: Do we still like the term "partial batch selector"?

Author: I do not like "partial batch selector" at all, but I have struggled to come up with a better name (e.g. more descriptive, without being too long). Suggestions for a better name are very welcome IMO

* `part_batch_selector`: The "partial batch selector" used by the Aggregators to
  determine how to aggregate each report:

    * For `leader_selected` tasks, the Leader specifies a "batch ID" that
      determines the batch to which each report for this aggregation job
      belongs.

      [OPEN ISSUE: For leader_selected tasks, the Leader is in complete control
      over which batch a report is included in. For time_interval tasks, the
      Client has some control, since the timestamp determines which batch window
      it falls in. Is this desirable from a privacy perspective? If not, it
      might be simpler to drop the timestamp altogether and have the agg init

>       request specify the batch window instead.]

Reviewer: This doesn't appear to be desirable from a privacy perspective. I'll note here that having the timestamp in the metadata seems to be helpful for replay protection, since it allows you to shard by batch interval.

I suggest we just delete this text.

Reviewer 3: I'm sure we've discussed this before so maybe I am missing something but there is an attack where a Leader separately collects reports from a single client and then only aggregates those.

For time intervals the leader is strongly constrained here and that's exactly why we prohibit overlapping time-intervals. We might however have lost this meaning in the wording over time...

> If the report pertains to a batch that was previously collected, then the input share MUST be marked as invalid with error batch_collected.

> Finally, the Aggregator checks that the batch does not contain a report that was included in any previous batch. If this batch overlap check fails, then the Aggregator MUST abort with error of type "batchOverlap". For time_interval tasks, it is sufficient (but not necessary) to check that the batch interval does not overlap with the batch interval of any previous query. If this batch interval check fails, then the Aggregator MAY abort with error of type "batchOverlap".

> For each report in the batch, the time at which that report was generated (see [Section 4.4](https://ietf-wg-ppm.github.io/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/draft-ietf-ppm-dap.html#upload-flow)) MUST fall within the batch interval specified by the Collector.

According to my probably incorrect memory this is supposed to be prevented by the collector deciding which reports to aggregate and the other aggregator checking as well.
We should be explicit about this attack in https://ietf-wg-ppm.github.io/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/draft-ietf-ppm-dap.html#name-batch-parameters

Author: Deleting the text SGTM because I think `time_interval`'s association of report to batch via timestamp is (plausibly) desirable from a privacy perspective.

Reviewer: @simon-friedberger I agree that time interval queries are much more constrained, and this definitely has benefits. But I don't think fixed size queries are unconstrained in a way that leads to overlapping batches. The aggregators are supposed to assign reports to batches and make sure each report is mapped to a single batch. At a high level, any query type needs to ensure that queries _partition_ the set of reports for a task.

Author: I added some text to the security considerations section capturing this concern.

  hpke_unknown_config_id(3),
  hpke_decrypt_error(4),
  vdaf_prep_error(5),
  task_expired(6),
  invalid_message(7),

>   report_too_early(8),

Reviewer: This is a wire-breaking change. We can avoid it by just deleting `batch_saturated` and not renumbering the remaining variants. However this would leave a gap in the variants defined in our draft, which is a bit odd.

I think we should avoid breaking changes if we can. An alternative would be to leave a note here that if we want a new variant before RFC, then the variant should use `6`.

We could take this one step further by being very explicit about what we want in the end:

```
enum {
  batch_collected(0),
  report_replayed(1),
  report_dropped(2),
  hpke_unknown_config_id(3),
  hpke_decrypt_error(4),
  vdaf_prep_error(5),
  /* [TODO Remove or replace this variant.] */
  todo_remove_me(6),
  task_expired(7),
  invalid_message(8),
  report_too_early(9),
  (256)
} PrepareError;
```

Author: I suppose -- every new draft is a breaking change because it will, at least, change the domain-separation strings. I suppose it could be argued that shifting the numbers around could lead to bugs in implementations that implement multiple DAP drafts & use the wrong "version" of `PrepareError`; but we could run into similar issues if/when we reuse the number with a new semantic meaning.

That said, I'm happy enough kicking the can down the road, as long as we clean things up for the final RFC.

Reviewer: We don't actually need to update the domain separation tags with each version. In fact, in the latest version of the VDAF draft, we didn't update the version tag because there were no breaking changes.

The body's media type is "application/dap-collection". The `Collection`
structure includes the following:

* `part_batch_selector`: Information used to bind the aggregate result to the

>   query. For leader_selected tasks, this includes the batch ID assigned to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  query. For leader-selected tasks, this includes the batch ID assigned to the
```

The body's media type is "application/dap-collection". The `Collection`
structure includes the following:

* `part_batch_selector`: Information used to bind the aggregate result to the

>   query. For fixed_size tasks, this includes the batch ID assigned to the batch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  query. For leader_selected tasks, this includes the batch ID assigned to the batch
```

    * For time_interval tasks, the request specifies the batch interval.

>     * For leader_selected tasks, the request specifies the batch ID.

Reviewer 2: names with _ are usually backquoted. Consider adding `` to  this and time_interval on above row

* For time_interval tasks, the batch selector is the batch interval specified in
  the query.

> * For leader_selected tasks, the batch selector is the batch ID sent in the

Author: The aggregate share AAD includes the batch ID, so the batch ID needs to be communicated to the Collector to allow decryption, alas. I restored the batch ID to the `Collection` message.

However, I think maybe this isn't the right fix (just the least controversial one to unbreak things for now). DAP aims to provide robustness only if both aggregators are honest (and robustness is trivally breakable by a single dishonest aggregator -- either aggregator can forge results). If both aggregators are honest, there is no need for the aggregate share AAD to include the batch ID, since there is no need for the Collector to e.g. detect the aggregator attempting to repeatedly transmit an aggregate share. So I think the "right" fix would be to drop batch ID from both the `Collection` and `AggregateShareAad` messages.

However, this argument applies just as well to every other field in `AggregateShareAad` -- so what is the purpose of the AAD here? (best-effort protection against bugs, perhaps?)

If this isn't trivially resolvable, this might be worthy of an issue to allow discussion on what the right fix is.

Author: (I think the same argument doesn't apply to `InputShareAad`, since this AAD is used to allow the Helper to ensure the encrypted report share it received from the Leader matches the rest of the report share.)

Reviewer: I think we should include the batch ID in the AAD. It's not strictly necessary in our threat model, so think of it as defense in depth: successful execution implies agreement on the batch ID between the aggregators and collector; this may have benefits we don't see right now.

As a general rule, binding protocol execution to crypto operations is a good idea whenever feasible. There are tons of examples of this, the most recent of which might be https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/691.

Author: Fair enough. Even if this AAD doesn't support the explicit threat model, at the very least it will help avoid accidental bugs which e.g. mismatch. (I'm not sure it can protect against any form of malice, as the components of the AAD are public to both  aggregators; and each aggregator can already falsify results of any aggregate shares it can control -- i.e. the Helper can falsify the Helper's aggregate share, the Leader can falsify the Leader or Helper's aggregate share.)

   {{anon-proxy}}.
1. Differential privacy ({{dp}}) can help mitigate Sybil attacks to some extent.

## Batch-selection Attacks {#batch-selection}

Depending on the batch mode, the privacy of an individual Client may be

> infringed upon by selection of the batch. For example, in the leader-selected

Author: I went with a different change: everywhere we are discussing the modes in text, rather than specifying a specific enum variant, I use time-interval/leader-selected instead of `time_interval`/`leader_selected`. I think this reads a little better.
